## Rt Interpretation and Using Rt to Guide Reopening

We think that Rt should be used as one of several metrics to consider when
making reopening decisions. We would suggest using multiple metrics, such as Rt,
case rate and death rate. Specifically, Rt measures the transmission rate, i.e,
how rapid the spread is on a given day. It is thus a relative measure on the
multiplicative scale. Absolute measures such as the number of new cases per day
or daily case rate should also be considered. For example, we can consider
Montana and Texas on July 3 and New York on May 11.

+ Montana (7/3): Rt of 1.58, 95% CI (1.4 - 1.77), 67 new cases.
+ Texas (7/3): Rt of 1.25, 95% CI (1.23 - 1.26), 6769 new cases.
+ New York (5/11): Rt of 0.77, 95% CI (0.76 - 0.78), 2419 new cases.

Montana has the highest Rt but doesn’t have that many new cases. That’s because
on previous days it had 40-50 cases, so having 67 new cases represents a big
jump, relative to 40-50.

Texas has Rt above 1, which means the disease is spreading. It has a lower Rt
compared to Montana but still has a substantial number of new cases. This means
that the pandemic is spreading less quickly in Texas than in Montana but it
would not be right to say that Texas is doing "better" than Montana, as there
are a much larger number of newly infected people in Texas given its much higher
case base. Hence the epidemic in Texas is much more severe than Montana.

For New York on 5/11, the Rt was low and below 1. This means that the number of
daily cases decreased. But on that day New York had the highest number of new
cases out of all 50 states. This means the interventions being put into place
were reducing the spread of the disease, but the number of newly infected
subjects was still large given NY had a larger base to start with.

In summary, we think that we need to look at both relative measures such as Rt
and absolute measures such as the number of new cases per day or daily case
rate. Rt can tell us where the trajectory of the disease is heading while the
number of new cases per day can tell us the size of the infected population, the
number of lives the disease has infected, and the number of people who may need
medical attention or need to be isolated. In addition, other metrics such as
number of deaths, the number of hospitalizations, hospital capacity, and
adherence to mask wearing and social distancing should be considered as well to
evaluate health care capacity and evaluate the extent of the implementation of
intervention measures. It is not safe to fully reopen by lifting all controls
when the number of cases is still large even when Rt is below 1. When Rt is
sufficiently below 1 and the number of new cases is sufficiently small for two
weeks, reopening still needs to have measures in place, such as mask wearing,
social distancing, test-trace-isolate, and emphasize adherence. Reopening should
be done in phases with close monitoring.
